Statement from Regional Administrator Debra Shore on the East Palestine Train Derailment | US EPA

Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

Official websites use .gov

A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Menu

Search

Search

Environmental Topics

Environmental Topics
Air
Bed Bugs
Chemicals, Toxics, and Pesticide
Emergency Response
Environmental Information by Location
Health
Land, Waste, and Cleanup
Lead
Mold
Radon
Research
Science Topics
Water Topics
A-Z Topic Index

Laws & Regulations

Laws & Regulations
By Business Sector
By Topic
Compliance
Enforcement
Guidance
Laws and Executive Orders
Regulations

Report a Violation

Report a Violation
Environmental Violations
Fraud, Waste or Abuse

About EPA

About EPA
Our Mission and What We Do
Headquarters Offices
Regional Offices
Labs and Research Centers
Newsroom
Planning, Budget, and Results
Organization Chart
EPA History

Breadcrumb

Home

News Releases

Statement from Regional Administrator Debra Shore on the East Palestine Train Derailment

February 14, 2023

Contact Information

Rachel Bassler
(
linduska.rachel@epa.gov
)

312-965-8901

“EPA Region 5’s number one priority is – and will always be – the health and safety of communities across the region. That’s why as soon as EPA was notified of the Norfolk Southern train derailment on Friday, February 3, EPA personnel were on-site by 2 a.m. Saturday morning to assist with air monitoring. Since then, EPA has been boots-on-the-ground, leading robust air-quality testing – including with the state-of-the-art
ASPECT plane
and a mobile analytical laboratory – in and around East Palestine.

Since the fire went out on February 8, EPA air monitoring has not detected any levels of health concern in the community that are attributed to the train derailment. Air monitoring data was provided to state health agencies on February 8 for review prior to the state’s decision to lift the evacuation.

As of February 14, EPA has assisted with the screening of 396 homes under a voluntary screening program offered to residents, and no detections of vinyl chloride or hydrogen chloride were identified. 65 additional homes are scheduled for today. We are continuing to conduct 24/7 air-monitoring to ensure the health and safety of residents.

EPA Region 5 is also working closely with Ohio EPA to determine what impact the spill has had on surface and ground water. State and local agencies are conducting sampling throughout the Ohio River to ensure drinking water intakes aren’t affected, and EPA is continuing to assist the state with sampling efforts at water treatment intake points along the Ohio River.

EPA Region 5 also issued a general notice of potential liability letter to Norfolk Southern to document the release of hazardous contaminants. The letter outlines EPA actions at the site and the potential to hold the railroad accountable for associated costs under EPA’s CERCLA authority.

Earlier today, I affirmed to Governor DeWine that EPA Region 5 will continue to support the state of Ohio as they lead response efforts at the site of the train derailment. Through the coordinated efforts of emergency responders, we will continue to protect the health and safety of all residents.”

For more information, EPA Region 5 has established a dedicated phone line (215-814-2400) staffed by community coordinators and created a web page for residents to stay informed about the most up to date monitoring results
https://response.epa.gov/EastPalestineTrainDerailment
.

###

Related Links

Region 05

Read other EPA News Releases about Emergency Response

Contact Us about News Releases

Contact Us about News Releases
to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.

Last updated on April 12, 2023

Assistance

Spanish

Arabic

Chinese (simplified)

Chinese (traditional)

French

Haitian Creole

Korean

Portuguese

Russian

Tagalog

Vietnamese

Discover.

Accessibility Statement

Budget & Performance

Contracting

EPA www Web Snapshot

Grants

No FEAR Act Data

Plain Writing

Privacy and Security Notice

Connect.

Data

Inspector General

Jobs

Newsroom

Regulations.gov

Subscribe

USA.gov

White House

Ask.

Contact EPA

EPA Disclaimers

Hotlines

FOIA Requests

Frequent Questions

Site Feedback

Follow.