About Executive Order 14108 | US EPA

Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

Official websites use .gov

A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Menu

Search

Search

Environmental Topics

Environmental Topics
Air
Bed Bugs
Chemicals, Toxics, and Pesticide
Emergency Response
Environmental Information by Location
Health
Land, Waste, and Cleanup
Lead
Mold
Radon
Research
Science Topics
Water Topics
A-Z Topic Index

Laws & Regulations

Laws & Regulations
By Business Sector
By Topic
Compliance
Enforcement
Guidance
Laws and Executive Orders
Regulations

Report a Violation

Report a Violation
Environmental Violations
Fraud, Waste or Abuse

About EPA

About EPA
Our Mission and What We Do
Headquarters Offices
Regional Offices
Labs and Research Centers
Newsroom
Planning, Budget, and Results
Organization Chart
EPA History

Breadcrumb

Home

East Palestine, Ohio Train Derailment

Legal and other documents

About Executive Order 14108

Important Information

This content is for informational purposes and is no longer updated.

Executive Order 14108 on Ensuring the People of East Palestine Are Protected Now and in the Future
On September 20, 2023, Executive Order 14108 (Executive Order on Ensuring the People of East Palestine Are Protected Now and in the Future) was issued. The order directs EPA to submit a report within 30 days on the cleanup efforts and on Norfolk Southern’s compliance with EPA’s February 21, 2023, Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act unilateral administrative order to address the imminent and substantial endangerment its derailment caused. Executive Order 14108 also directs EPA to explain the status of air, soil, surface water, groundwater, and drinking water sampling and monitoring, and to submit an updated report to the President every 60 days thereafter until all cleanup, assessment, and monitoring work required by EPA’s UAO has been completed.
EPA’s number one priority has been — and continues to be — the health and safety of the community. Since the disaster, EPA has collected more than 100 million air monitoring data points and more than 35,000 samples (air, water and soil) in and around the community. This data collection continues, and ongoing science-based reviews show that residents of East Palestine are not in danger from contaminated drinking water, soil, or air from the derailment.
Since February, there has been tremendous progress towards removing contamination resulting from the derailment from the community — excavating and disposing of more than 165,000 tons of contaminated soil and shipping more than 35 million gallons of wastewater off-site. The contaminated soil and gravel beneath the train tracks at the derailment location have been excavated and transported off-site for disposal. Excavation of contaminated soil from affected areas near the tracks is complete, and site-wide confirmation sampling is underway to double-check that all contamination resulting from the derailment has been removed.
Executive Order 14108

EPA Report Submitted Pursuant to Section 2(b) of Executive Order 14108 (pdf)

(1.97 MB)

Executive Order Report 150 day update February 20, 2024 (pdf)

(836.14 KB)

Executive Order Report 210 day update April 22, 2024 (pdf)

(1.04 MB)

Executive Order Report 270 day update June 21, 2024 (pdf)

(943.77 KB)

Executive Order Report 330 day update August 23, 2024 (pdf)

(877.7 KB)

Executive Order Report 390 day update October 23, 2024 (pdf)

(380.83 KB)

Executive Order Report 450 day update December 22, 2024 (pdf)

(2.42 MB)

East Palestine, Ohio Train Derailment

East Palestine, Ohio Train Derailment Home

Operational Updates

Resources for Affected Residents
Public Health Resources
Home and Office Cleaning
Settlement Update

Air Monitoring and Sampling Data
About Air Monitoring
Air Sampling Data
Air Monitoring Documents

Soil and Sediment Data
Soil and Sediment Sampling Data
Phase One Residential, Commercial, and Agricultural Soil Sampling Results
Soil and Sediment Sampling Results Quick Reference Guide
Event Reconstruction Plume Map
City Park Soil Sampling Results
Qualitative Sheen Assessment Results
Response to Inaccurate Dioxin Reporting
Workplan to Cleanup Sediment in Sulphur and Leslie Runs

Water Sampling Data
Water Management Update

Data Validation Reports: Air, Soil, Water

Photos

Videos

Newsletters

Legal and other documents
About Executive Order 14108
Clean Water Act Administrative Order and Directives
Full Characterization Workplan

Frequently Asked Questions
About Soil Sampling
Taggart Street Reopening

Background

News Releases

Contact Us About the East Palestine, Ohio Train Derailment

Contact Us About the East Palestine, Ohio Train Derailment
to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.

Last updated on August 31, 2026

Assistance

Spanish

Arabic

Chinese (simplified)

Chinese (traditional)

French

Haitian Creole

Korean

Portuguese

Russian

Tagalog

Vietnamese

Discover.

Accessibility Statement

Budget & Performance

Contracting

EPA www Web Snapshot

Grants

No FEAR Act Data

Plain Writing

Privacy and Security Notice

Connect.

Data

Inspector General

Jobs

Newsroom

Regulations.gov

Subscribe

USA.gov

White House

Ask.

Contact EPA

EPA Disclaimers

Hotlines

FOIA Requests

Frequent Questions

Site Feedback

Follow.