What do we know about the Ohio train derailment and toxic chemical leak? | Ohio train derailment | The Guardian

Skip to main content
Skip to navigation
Close dialogue
1
/
1
Next image
Previous image
Toggle caption
Print subscriptions
Newsletters
Sign in
US
US edition
UK edition
Australia edition
Europe edition
International edition
The Guardian - Back to home
The Guardian
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Show more
Hide expanded menu
News
View all News
US news
US politics
Midterms 2026
World news
Climate crisis
Middle East
Ukraine
US immigration
Soccer
Business
Environment
Tech
Science
Newsletters
The Filter
Wellness
Opinion
View all Opinion
The Guardian view
Columnists
Letters
Opinion videos
Cartoons
Sport
View all Sport
Soccer
NFL
Tennis
MLB
MLS
NBA
WNBA
NHL
F1
Golf
Culture
View all Culture
Film
Books
Music
Art & design
TV & radio
Stage
Classical
Games
Design a better world
Lifestyle
View all Lifestyle
The Filter
Wellness
Fashion
Food
Recipes
Love & sex
Home & garden
Health & fitness
Family
Travel
Money
Search input

google-search

Search
Support us
Print subscriptions
Newsletters
Download the app
Search jobs
Digital Archive
Guardian Licensing
Live events
About Us
The Guardian app
Video
Podcasts
Pictures
Inside the Guardian
Guardian Weekly
Crosswords
Wordiply
Corrections
Tips
Search input

google-search

Search
Search jobs
Digital Archive
Guardian Licensing
Live events
About Us
Environment
Climate crisis
Wildlife
Energy
Pollution
Green light

Crews released toxic chemicals from derailed tanker cars to prevent an explosion.
Photograph: Gene J Puskar/AP
View image in fullscreen
Crews released toxic chemicals from derailed tanker cars to prevent an explosion.
Photograph: Gene J Puskar/AP
Ohio train derailment

This article is more than
3 years old
Explainer
What do we know about the Ohio train derailment and toxic chemical leak?
This article is more than 3 years old
At least five hazardous chemicals released in East Palestine train crash, as residents fear long-term effects
Lauren Aratani
Wed 15 Feb 2023 11.53 EST
Last modified on Thu 23 Feb 2023 10.58 EST
Share
Prefer the Guardian on Google
A train carrying hazardous materials heading from Pennsylvania to Illinois derailed in early February, causing a
major fire
and alarm over a possible imminent explosion. The situation has local people worried, despite reassurances from officials, and has highlighted how vulnerable many Americans are to similar incidents.
Up to 2,000 residents living in the immediate area were
evacuated
as chemicals being carried by the train, run by Norfolk Southern Corporation, were
released
to prevent an explosion.
Ohio catastrophe is ‘wake-up call’ to dangers of deadly train derailments
Read more
Evacuated residents returned to their homes last week but residents report concerns over the lingering effects of the chemicals in the air, water and soil even as officials monitoring the area have deemed it safe. Officials are still investigating the potential long-term environmental impacts of the derailment.
Here is what we know about the derailment and the chemical release so far.
What happened
On the night of Friday 3 February, at least 50 out of 150 train cars of a train heading from Conway, Pennsylvania, to Madison, Illinois, derailed. The train derailed in East Palestine,
Ohio
, a town of about 5,000 residents along the Ohio and Pennsylvania border. A huge fire that spanned the length of the derailed cars erupted. No injuries or deaths were reported.
Residents within a one-mile radius of the derailment were evacuated as officials noted that over a dozen cars carrying vinyl chloride, a carcinogenic chemical, were involved in the derailment and could have been exposed to the fire.
On Monday 6 February, officials enacted a mandatory evacuation, threatening to arrest residents who refused to evacuate, as fear of an explosion rose. Governor Mike DeWine told residents that leaving was “a matter of life and death”. Crews ended up
releasing
toxic chemicals from five derailed tanker cars to prevent an explosion. Small holes were made into the train cars, whose chemicals were released into pits that were lit on fire. Pictures of the chemical release showed huge clouds of black smoke billowing into the sky over homes.
Evacuated residents, who were staying at shelters and schools, were given the clear to return to their homes on Wednesday 8 February as officials deemed air and water samples safe for residents.
What chemicals were released
The most concerning chemical being carried by the derailed train was vinyl chloride, which is used to make polyvinyl chloride, or PVC, a hard resin used in plastic products. Vinyl chloride is colorless and highly flammable. It has been linked to a rare form of liver cancer, as well as other types of cancer like leukemia and lung cancer. Short-term exposure effects include dizziness and drowsiness, while high exposure can lead to hospitalization and death. Another chemical on board was butyl acrylate, also used in plastic production.
Freshwater fish more contaminated with ‘forever chemicals’ than in oceans
Read more
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) later released
information
that showed three previously unreported chemicals were also released upon the derailment: ethylhexyl acrylate, isobutylene and ethylene glycol monobutyl ether. Exposure to the chemicals can cause shortness of breath, burning in the skin and eyes, coughing, headaches and nausea, among other symptoms.
In total, the EPA has reported
five chemicals
that were contained in rail cars that were “derailed, breached and/or on fire”, in a
letter
the agency wrote to Norfolk Southern.
Investigation into the derailment and chemical release
The National Transportation Safety Board, which investigates major rail accidents, said a malfunction of an axle – a rod that connects two train wheels – caused the derailment. Surveillance camera
footage
from a Salem, Ohio, manufacturer showed a fire under the train happening before it reached East Palestine. An investigation into the derailment is still under way.
Meanwhile, the EPA has been actively monitoring environmental conditions in East Palestine and surrounding towns. Residents have
signed up
for voluntary home screenings by the agency. As of 13 February, the EPA did not detect vinyl chloride or hydrogen chloride – a chemical that is released by burning vinyl chloride – in 291 screened homes, with 181 homes waiting for screening. Officials have told residents that monitoring has shown the area’s drinking water to be safe.
Concerns from residents
Despite reassurances from officials that the area’s air and water quality is safe, residents in the vicinity of the derailment have reported multiple health symptoms, including
nausea
and burning sensation in their eyes. One resident in a town 10 miles north of East Palestine told a
local TV news station
that six of their chickens died suddenly a day after the chemical release. Another nearby resident
reported
seeing dead fish floating in a local creek. Experts have
expressed concerns
that the agency is not testing for other chemicals that could have been made through the burning of the toxic substances.
Local business owners and residents are
suing
Norfolk Southern in an effort to get the company to cover medical screenings for residents within a 30-mile radius of the derailment. The lawsuit argues that the company “failed to exercise reasonable care to protect” local residents, who were “exposed to toxic substances, toxic fumes and carcinogens”.
The EPA warned Norfolk Southern that it could be liable for costs related to the derailment, including cleanup and prevention efforts.
History of toxic derailments goes back a decade
Reports have shown that as many as 25 million Americans live in
zones
that are vulnerable to
deadly derailments
of trains carrying toxic materials, including substances that can cause explosions.
Just over a decade ago in November 2012, a similar
derailment
in New Jersey caused 23,000 gallons of vinyl chloride to be released into the environment. The incident sparked a push for further regulation of the rail industry over how it handles the transportation of toxic materials, including crude oil and hazardous chemicals, according to investigative news outlet, the
Lever
. The push ultimately led to a law that required trains carrying toxic substances to be retrofitted with electronic braking systems, which brake trains cars immediately altogether, rather than front to back like conventional brakes.
The Trump administration, under pressure from lobbyists who argued the change was costly to rail companies, rescinded the rule.
Explore more on these topics
Ohio train derailment
Rail transport
Ohio
Pollution
explainers
Share
Reuse this content
Most viewed
Most viewed
Environment
Climate crisis
Wildlife
Energy
Pollution
Green light
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning
Sign up for our email
About us
Help
Complaints & corrections
Contact us
Tip us off
SecureDrop
Privacy policy
Cookie policy
Tax strategy
Terms & conditions
All topics
All writers
Newsletters
Digital newspaper archive
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Threads
TikTok
YouTube
Advertise with us
Guardian Labs
Search jobs
Work with us
Accessibility settings

Back to top
©
2026
Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.

(dcr)